docs: improve Python docs, add section about PEP 668 (#16643)
Homebrew/brew: docs/Homebrew-and-Python.md

This page describes how Python is handled in Homebrew for users. See [Python for Formula Authors](Python-for-Formula-Authors.md) for advice on writing formulae to install packages written in Python.

> Homebrew will install the necessary Python 3 version that is needed to make your packages work. Older versions of Python are not supported

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Homebrew will install the necessary Python 3 version that is needed to make your packages work. Python 2 (or 1) are not supported.
```

## Python 3

Homebrew provides formulae for the newest and maintained releases of Python 3 (`python@3.y`) (https://devguide.python.org/versions/).

> We keep older `python@3.y` (maintained) versions only to support upstream packages that have not migrated to the newest Python version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We keep older `python@3.y` versions according to our [versioned formulae guidelines](https://docs.brew.sh/Versions).
```

This page describes how Python is handled in Homebrew for users. See [Python for Formula Authors](Python-for-Formula-Authors.md) for advice on writing formulae to install packages written in Python.

Homebrew should work with any [CPython](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2324208/is-there-any-difference-between-cpython-and-python) and defaults to the macOS system Python.

> Homebrew provides formulae to brew Python 3.y. A `python@2` formula was provided until the end of 2019, at which point it was removed due to the Python 2 deprecation.

Reviewer: `Homebrew provides formulae to brew Python 3.y.` feels like it may still be useful here?

Reviewer 2: Agree, maybe we can say "Homebrew provides formulae for Python 3. Older versions of Python are not supported."?

("Python 3" is the idiomatic-ish way to refer to `3.x`)

> Homebrew should work with any [CPython](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2324208/is-there-any-difference-between-cpython-and-python) and defaults to the macOS system Python. On Linux Homebrew will install the necessary Python version that is needed to make your packages work.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Homebrew should work with any [CPython](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2324208/is-there-any-difference-between-cpython-and-python). On Linux Homebrew will install the necessary Python version that is needed to make your packages work.
```

macOS system Python doesn't exist anymore and I suspect "defaults to" doesn't really make any sense here anymore (it's not keg-only anymore).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Or to be honest, the whole sentence doesn't even make sense. If "Homebrew should work with" means what formulae will pick up at build-time, then we don't allow arbitrary installations of Python anymore and haven't for quite some time under the superenv so "any CPython" isn't true.

Author: I have cleanup up this part

> ## Python 3.y

Reviewer 2: Nitpick, please ignore if not preferred:

```suggestion
## Python 3
```

> Homebrew provides formulae for all maintained releases of Python 3.y (`python@3.y`).

Reviewer: How do you know if a release is maintained or not? Should this be "supported"?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, supported. The support cycle is here, IMO we should link it:  https://devguide.python.org/versions/

Reviewer 4: We only provide these older maintained releases because they are dependencies of other formulae, right? It's not because we *want* to provide **all** of them.

**Important:** Python may be upgraded to a newer version at any time. Consider using a version

> manager such as `pyenv` or `pipx` if you require stability of minor or patch versions for virtual environments.

Reviewer: I'd rather we just picked one and suggested it here.

Reviewer 2: I _think_ we can leave this at just `pyenv` -- `pipx` is a great tool, but (AFAIK) doesn't perform Python version management itself.

Reviewer 5: Fun fact, `pipx` is gaining some version management features in the next release: https://github.com/pypa/pipx/pull/1243

But agreed this can just mention `pyenv` as it's the current standard

$(brew --prefix python)/libexec/bin
```

> **Warning!** The executables do not always point to the latest Python 3.y version, as there is always a delay between the newest Python 3.y release and the homebrew-core repository switching to the newest version.

Reviewer 2: Nitpick, feel free to ignore if you prefer the `.y` 🙂 

```suggestion
**Warning!** The executables do not always point to the latest Python 3, as there is always a delay between the newest Python 3 release and the homebrew-core repository switching to the newest version.
```

> **Warning!** The executables do not always point to the latest Python 3.y version, as there is always a delay between the newest Python 3.y release and the homebrew-core repository switching to the newest version.

Reviewer 3: We allow the user to pick their own `python3` binary as we install it in `libexec/bin`. This whole section probably need rewritten to reflect that.

These should be installed via `pip install <package>`. To discover, you can use <https://pypi.org/search>.

> Starting with Python 3.12, we highly recommend you to use a separate virtualenv for this (see the section about [PEP688](https://peps.python.org/pep-0668/#marking-an-interpreter-as-using-an-external-package-manager) below).

Reviewer 2: Typo (688 -> 668):

```suggestion
Starting with Python 3.12, we highly recommend you to use a separate virtualenv for this (see the section about [PEP 668](https://peps.python.org/pep-0668/#marking-an-interpreter-as-using-an-external-package-manager) below).
```

These should be installed via `pip install <package>`. To discover, you can use <https://pypi.org/search>.

> Starting with Python 3.12, we highly recommend you to use a separate virtualenv for this (see the section about PEP688 below).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting with Python 3.12, we highly recommend you to use a separate virtualenv for this (see the section about [PEP688](https://peps.python.org/pep-0668/#marking-an-interpreter-as-using-an-external-package-manager) below).
```

> Starting with Python 3.12, we highly recommend you to use a separate virtualenv for this (see the section about PEP688 below).

Reviewer 3: Is this "highly recommend" or "must" given I think `pip install` is blocked now?

> Starting with Python 3.12, we highly recommend you to use a separate virtualenv for this (see the section about PEP688 below).

Reviewer 2: Small typo + formatting suggestion:

```suggestion
Starting with Python 3.12, we highly recommend you to use a separate virtualenv for this (see the section about PEP 668 below).
```

CFLAGS="-I$(brew --prefix)/include" LDFLAGS="-L$(brew --prefix)/lib" pip install <package>
```

**Warning!** When you `brew install` formulae that provide Python bindings, you should **not be in an active virtual environment.**

Activate the virtualenv *after* you have installed your package with brew, or install brew's packages in a fresh terminal window. This will ensure Python modules are installed into Homebrew's `site-packages` and *not* into that of the virtual environment.

> ## PEP688 (Python@3.12) and virtualenvs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## PEP 668 (Python@3.12) and virtualenvs
```

> Starting with Python@3.12, Homebrew follows [PEP688](https://peps.python.org/pep-0668/#marking-an-interpreter-as-using-an-external-package-manager).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting with Python@3.12, Homebrew follows [PEP 668](https://peps.python.org/pep-0668/#marking-an-interpreter-as-using-an-external-package-manager).
```

> If you wish to install a non-brew-packaged Python package (from Pypi for example):

Reviewer 2: Nitpick:

```suggestion
If you wish to install a non-brew-packaged Python package (from PyPI for example):
```

* create a virtual environment using `python3 -m venv path/to/venv`. Then use `path/to/venv/bin/python` and `path/to/venv/bin/pip`.
* or use `pipx install xyz`, which will manage a virtual environment for you.
  You can install `pipx` by running `brew install pipx`.
  When you use `pipx` to install a Python application, it will always use a virtual environment for you.

> It is possible to install some Python packages as formulae, by using `brew install xyz`. We do not recommend using these formulae and recommend you install them with pip using a virtualenv. These syste-wide Hombrew Python formulae are often Homebrew-specific formulae that are useful as dependencies for other Homebrew formulae. It is not recommended to rely on them.

Reviewer 6: Some typos to fix for future PR:
```suggestion
It is possible to install some Python packages as formulae, by using `brew install xyz`. We do not recommend using these formulae and recommend you install them with pip using a virtualenv. These system-wide Homebrew Python formulae are often Homebrew-specific formulae that are useful as dependencies for other Homebrew formulae. It is not recommended to rely on them.
```

> It is possible to install some Python packages system-wide, by using `brew install xyz`, where xyz is the package you are trying to install. We do not recommend using these packages and recommend you install them with pip using a virtualenv. These syste-wide Hombrew Python packages are often Homebrew-specific packages that are useful as depdencies for other Homebrew packages. It is not recommended to rely on them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to install some Python packages as formulae, by using `brew install`. We do not recommend using these formulae and recommend you install them with pip using a virtualenv. These syste-wide Hombrew Python packages are often Homebrew-specific packages that are useful as dependencies for other Homebrew packages. It is not recommended to rely on them.
```

CFLAGS="-I$(brew --prefix)/include" LDFLAGS="-L$(brew --prefix)/lib" pip install <package>
```

**Warning!** When you `brew install` formulae that provide Python bindings, you should **not be in an active virtual environment.**

Activate the virtualenv *after* you have installed your package with brew, or install brew's packages in a fresh terminal window. This will ensure Python modules are installed into Homebrew's `site-packages` and *not* into that of the virtual environment.

## PEP688 (Python@3.12) and virtualenvs

> Starting with Python@3.12, Homebrew follows PEP688:
> https://peps.python.org/pep-0668/#marking-an-interpreter-as-using-an-external-package-manager

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting with Python@3.12, Homebrew follows [PEP688](https://peps.python.org/pep-0668/#marking-an-interpreter-as-using-an-external-package-manager).
```

> To install Python packages system-wide, try `brew install xyz`, where xyz is the package you are trying to install.

Reviewer: This seems (too) obvious?

Author: I have reorganised this part differently.

If you wish to install a non-brew-packaged Python package, create a virtual environment using `python3 -m venv path/to/venv`.

> Then use `path/to/venv/bin/python` and `path/to/venv/bin/pip`.

Reviewer 3: I'd reorder this to suggest virtualenvs first. And maybe clarify we don't ship many Python libraries in favour of using virtualenvs.

Author: Reordering done :)

> If you wish to install a non-brew packaged Python application, it may be easiest to use `pipx install xyz`, which will manage a virtual environment for you. Make sure you have `pipx` installed.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
If you wish to install a non-brew packaged Python application, it may be easiest to use `pipx install xyz`, which will manage a virtual environment for you.
You can install `pipx` using Homebrew, using the command `brew install pipx`.
When you use `pipx` to install a Python application, it will always use a virtual environment for you, even if `pipx` was installed via Homebrew.
```

Reviewer: Yeh, once sentence per line would be nice.
